22.25 The zsh/stat Module

The zsh/stat module makes available one builtin command under two possible names:

zstat [ -gnNolLtTrs ] [ -f fd ] [ -H hash ] [ -A array ] [ -F fmt ]
      [ +element ] [ file ... ]
stat ...
The command acts as a front end to the stat system call (see man page stat(2)). The same command is provided with two names; as the name stat is often used by an external command it is recommended that only the zstat form of the command is used. This can be arranged by loading the module with the command ‘zmodload -F zsh/stat b:zstat’.

If the stat call fails, the appropriate system error message printed and status 1 is returned. The fields of struct stat give information about the files provided as arguments to the command. In addition to those available from the stat call, an extra element ‘link’ is provided. These elements are:

device
The number of the device on which the file resides.

inode
The unique number of the file on this device (‘inode’ number).

mode
The mode of the file; that is, the file’s type and access permissions. With the -s option, this will be returned as a string corresponding to the first column in the display of the ls -l command.

nlink
The number of hard links to the file.

uid
The user ID of the owner of the file. With the -s option, this is displayed as a user name.

gid
The group ID of the file. With the -s option, this is displayed as a group name.

rdev
The raw device number. This is only useful for special devices.

size
The size of the file in bytes.

atime
mtime
ctime
The last access, modification and inode change times of the file, respectively, as the number of seconds since midnight GMT on 1st January, 1970. With the -s option, these are printed as strings for the local time zone; the format can be altered with the -F option, and with the -g option the times are in GMT.

blksize
The number of bytes in one allocation block on the device on which the file resides.

block
The number of disk blocks used by the file.

link
If the file is a link and the -L option is in effect, this contains the name of the file linked to, otherwise it is empty. Note that if this element is selected (‘‘zstat +link’’) then the -L option is automatically used.

A particular element may be selected by including its name preceded by a ‘+’ in the option list; only one element is allowed. The element may be shortened to any unique set of leading characters. Otherwise, all elements will be shown for all files.

Options:

-A array
Instead of displaying the results on standard output, assign them to an array, one struct stat element per array element for each file in order. In this case neither the name of the element nor the name of the files appears in array unless the -t or -n options were given, respectively. If -t is given, the element name appears as a prefix to the appropriate array element; if -n is given, the file name appears as a separate array element preceding all the others. Other formatting options are respected.

-H hash
Similar to -A, but instead assign the values to hash. The keys are the elements listed above. If the -n option is provided then the name of the file is included in the hash with key name.

-f fd
Use the file on file descriptor fd instead of named files; no list of file names is allowed in this case.

-F fmt
Supplies a strftime (see man page strftime(3)) string for the formatting of the time elements. The -s option is implied.

-g
Show the time elements in the GMT time zone. The -s option is implied.

-l
List the names of the type elements (to standard output or an array as appropriate) and return immediately; arguments, and options other than -A, are ignored.

-L
Perform an lstat (see man page lstat(2)) rather than a stat system call. In this case, if the file is a link, information about the link itself rather than the target file is returned. This option is required to make the link element useful. It’s important to note that this is the exact opposite from man page ls(1), etc.

-n
Always show the names of files. Usually these are only shown when output is to standard output and there is more than one file in the list.

-N
Never show the names of files.

-o
If a raw file mode is printed, show it in octal, which is more useful for human consumption than the default of decimal. A leading zero will be printed in this case. Note that this does not affect whether a raw or formatted file mode is shown, which is controlled by the -r and -s options, nor whether a mode is shown at all.

-r
Print raw data (the default format) alongside string data (the -s format); the string data appears in parentheses after the raw data.

-s
Print mode, uid, gid and the three time elements as strings instead of numbers. In each case the format is like that of ls -l.

-t
Always show the type names for the elements of struct stat. Usually these are only shown when output is to standard output and no individual element has been selected.

-T
Never show the type names of the struct stat elements.